The Preliminary Notice
If you receive a Preliminary Notice, don’t panic. The
preliminary notice isn’t a lien; it is a notice that a
subcontractor or supplier has provided or will be providing
goods and/or services to improve your property and could
file a lien claim if he/she is not paid.
Don’t expect a Preliminary Notice from a prime contractor.
The prime contractor isn’t required to send a Preliminary
Notice, as the Mechanics Lien Warning is required to be
part of the contract. He/she may still record a mechanics
lien against your property if not paid the amount owed in
the contract you have signed. The prime contractor must
provide a Preliminary Notice to the construction lender if
the contracted project is being financed by a loan.
Preliminary Notices allow you to track who has a potential
claim against your property. Subcontractors and suppliers
must provide you with this notice to maintain their right to
file a lien. If they don’t provide you with the notice, they
lose their lien rights.
Watch the timing. A subcontractor or supplier can give you
the Preliminary Notice before delivering supplies or starting
work and up to 20 days after delivering supplies or starting
work. If the notice is later, the subcontractor or supplier is
only entitled to foreclose a lien to recover payments owed
20 days before receipt of the notice and anytime thereafter.
Effective January 1, 2011, the mechanics lien,
including the Notice of Mechanics Lien, must be
served on the owner of the property. If the owner
cannot be located, notice must be served on the property’s
construction lender or the original contractor, along with
a proof of service affidavit. Failure to serve the
mechanics lien, including the Notice of Mechanics
Lien, will result in the mechanics lien being
unenforceable. Homeowners should retain the Notice of
Mechanics Lien along with all other documentation related
to their home improvement contract.

There is a lien on your property—
now what?
If a lien is placed on your home, you may want to consult an
attorney for help in releasing the lien. There are a number of
reasons a lien might be invalid; for example, the work was

not completed or the supplies were not incorporated into the
structure. Many lien claims are invalid because the contractor,
subcontractor, materials supplier, or laborer has failed to meet
the required timelines for filing the claim or has not provided the
lien copy and Notice of Mechanics Lien to the property owner.
Review the Lien Requirements Checklist in this brochure to help
determine if the claimant followed the required time lines.

Steps to Remove an Invalid Lien
Follow the steps below to begin the process of removing an
invalid lien:
• Send the lien claimant a written request by certified mail.
Keep a copy of your letter and the certification as proof of
your request. Include:
– Deviations you’ve identified from the Lien Requirements
Checklist;
– A request for the claimant to remove the lien. Remind
the claimant that if the lien isn’t removed and you have
to hire an attorney to remove it, the court can award
you all reasonable attorney fees. [Prior to a revision
of mechanics lien law effective July 1, 2012 (SB 189,
Statutes of 2010, Chapter 697), this amount was capped
at $2,000.]
• Keep all of your paperwork. You may need to demonstrate
to a court that the lien claimant is unable or unwilling to
execute a release of the lien or cannot, with reasonable
diligence, be found (Civil Code section 8484(f)).
• Send the request to the claimant’s last known address.
(Do your homework to verify that you have the correct last
known address.) Sometimes, sending the letter is enough
to persuade the lien claimant to release the lien.

Lien Requirements Checklist
Confirm that the Preliminary Notice was given to
you within the strict time frames.
A subcontractor or material supplier has 20 days after
beginning work or delivering materials to serve you a
Preliminary Notice. If the notice is late, the claimant loses
lien rights for work done or materials delivered more than
20 days before the notice. Laborers are not required to
give you a Preliminary Notice.

Preventing
Mechanics Liens
Protect Your Home and Financial Stability

Find out from your county recorder’s office whether
the potential lien claimant filed the mechanics lien
within the legal time frame.
The potential lien claimant must record the mechanics
lien within 90 days of:
• Completion of work,
• When the owner began using the improvement, or
• When the owner accepted the improvement.
If the potential lien claimant fails to record the mechanics
lien within the appropriate time frame, the lien isn’t valid.
Once a mechanics lien is recorded, it attaches to your
title, and must be removed.
A lien on your property can cause difficulties when
borrowing, refinancing, or selling your home.
Check to see whether you received a copy of the
lien and a Notice of Mechanics Lien, and that the
contractor seeking the lien filed a Proof of Service
Affidavit with the county recorder’s office.

CONTRACTORS STATE
LICENSE BOARD

Petition to Release an Invalid Lien
If the lien claimant does not remove the invalid lien, and the
time has expired to record the mechanics lien and take action
to foreclose, you may petition the court for a decree to release
the property from the lien. This is a complicated process that
may require the services of an attorney. Refer to Civil Code
sections 8480-8488 for more information. Civil Code section
8488 provides that if you use an attorney and you prevail, you
are entitled to reasonable attorney’s fees.

a homeowner’s guide to

Department of Consumer Affairs
CONTRACTORS STATE LICENSE BOARD
P.O. Box 26000
Sacramento, CA 95826-0026
800.321.CSLB (2752)
www.cslb.ca.gov • CheckTheLicenseFirst.com
DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS
13P-057/1016

Minimize Your Risks and Take Steps
to Protect Your Home

When a Lien is Filed Against Your Property

Preventing Liens

NOTICE OF COMPLETION

A lien can result in a range of problems:

When you hire a prime (primary) contractor for a
construction project at your home, he or she typically
hires laborers and subcontractors to do some of the work,
and purchases materials for the job from construction
suppliers. If the contractor—or subcontractors, workers
or suppliers—who provide goods or services to improve
your property aren’t paid, they can file what is called a
mechanics lien on your property.

• Foreclosure of the property to pay the unpaid contractors,
material suppliers or laborers;

Before you pay your prime contractor, consider the possibility
of a lien being recorded on your property’s title. Keep track of
Preliminary Notices so that you are aware of who may file a lien
claim on your property. There are a few specific methods you can
use to make sure potential lien claimants have been paid:

You can reduce the amount of time a contractor, subcontractor,
material supplier, or laborer has to record a lien claim by filing
a Notice of Completion with the county recorder’s office after
work is completed. If you recorded a Notice of Completion,
a prime contractor has 60 days to file a lien claim while a
subcontractor or material supplier has 30 days.

Mechanics lien law is complicated and confusing, and
there are real risks involved for homeowners. Avoid
risking foreclosure of your home, a lien on your property
title, or having to pay twice for the same job by preparing
for the possibility of a lien, and employing the safeguards
identified in this brochure to protect your home and
financial stability.

What is a Mechanics Lien?
A mechanics lien is a legal claim against, or security
interest in, your property that, if unpaid, allows a
foreclosure action, forcing the sale of your home to
satisfy any project debts. The lien claim is filed in a
county recorder’s or clerk-recorder’s office by an unpaid
contractor, subcontractor, supplier, or worker.
The prime contractor has a direct, contractual agreement
with the homeowner. If the contractor isn’t paid, he or
she can sue on the contract and/or record a mechanics
lien. But subcontractors, workers and suppliers don’t
have a contract with the homeowner. A problem can
occur when the homeowner pays the prime contractor for
all or some of the work, but the prime contractor fails to
pay the laborers, subcontractors, and materials suppliers
that were hired to do portions of the job. If they are not
paid, often their only recourse is to file a mechanics lien
on the property.

• Double payment for the same job—if the homeowner pays
the prime contractor and then has to pay the subcontractors,
suppliers, or workers who weren’t paid by the prime; and/or
• An unresolved issue on the property’s title, which can affect
the homeowner’s ability to borrow against, refinance, or sell
the property.

How to Protect Yourself
You can help protect yourself from unwarranted liens by carefully
selecting your contractor and responsibly managing your
construction project. Thoroughly check your prime contractor’s
business and professional work before you sign a contract:
• Hire only licensed contractors and check the contractor’s
license status on CSLB’s website at www.cslb.ca.gov;

JOINT CHECKS
Joint checks are the simplest way to prevent construction
liens. When the contractor presents a bill for materials or
labor, compare it to the schedule of payments in your contract
and the Preliminary Notice(s) you’ve received. Make sure that
work was provided as described and then make out the check
to both the contractor and the supplier, or the contractor and
the subcontractor. Both parties will have to endorse the check,
which will ensure that the subcontractors and suppliers are
paid. Save the cancelled check signed by each of the parties to
serve as a receipt.

• Check with your local courthouse to see if the prime contractor
has a history of litigation;

LIEN RELEASES
The release system is designed to allow property owners to track
when potential lien claimants have been paid—whether part
of a progress payment or upon completion of the entire project.
There are conditional and unconditional releases for progress
and final payments. Here’s how the lien release system works:

• Get a list of all subcontractors, laborers, and material suppliers
to be used by your prime contractor; and

• Before you make a payment, you first should get a signed
conditional release from the possible lien claimant(s).

• Check with suppliers, subcontractors, and employees
about the payment history of the prime contractor.

• You or your contractor can download and use the release
forms from CSLB’s website at www.cslb.ca.gov. The prime
contractor is required to give you a signed release from
potential lien claimants if you request it.

• Make sure your contractor hires only licensed subcontractors,
and check their licenses, too;

Get a written contract and make sure it includes:
• A schedule that demonstrates when specific construction
activities will begin and end, (such as the framing, sheetrock
work, or painting) and the projected payments that are tied to
the contract price of these activities;
• Identification of subcontractors and workers who will be
performing these construction activities; and
• Identification of suppliers who are providing materials
necessary for the project.

• After you receive the conditional release(s), make the
appropriate payment for the work that was done.
• After you pay, request that the contractor give you an
unconditional release signed by each of the claimants
paid for the portion of the job for which they are
relinquishing their lien rights. Make sure that the actual
claimant signs the unconditional release.
• By law, you may withhold the next payment until you get
the unconditional releases for the previous payment.

The property owner has 15 days from the date of project
completion to file the notice.
LIEN FORECLOSURE ACTION
Check with your county superior court to find out whether the
subcontractor, material supplier, or laborer filed a timely lien
foreclosure action.
A lien foreclosure action is a lawsuit to foreclose the mechanics
lien, and must be filed by the claimant within 90 days of the
date that he or she recorded the mechanics lien. Often a lien
claimant with a valid claim will fail to follow through, making
the lien invalid. If the contractor, subcontractor, material supplier,
or laborer fails to follow any of these strict time frames, you can
petition the court to remove the lien.
Failure to serve a copy of the lien and the Notice of
Mechanics Lien on the property owner or construction lender,
and secure a proof of service affidavit, also will make the
lien unenforceable.
Be aware that although anyone can record a mechanics
lien, a non-licensed individual cannot foreclose on a
mechanics lien if the work is valued at more than $500.
(BPC §7031 – compensation prohibited.)

