Terms of Agreement
A Consumer Guide to
Home Improvement Contracts

CONTRACTORS STATE
LICENSE BOARD
California Department of Consumer Affairs

1

A

C O N S U M E R

G U I D E TO

H O M E

I M P R OV E M E NT

C O NT R AC T S

This contract is the most important communication tool between
you and your contractor; it should identify all project expectations
to help avoid misunderstandings.
In California, the terms of all home improvement projects over
$500 (combined material and labor costs) must be in a contract
and include specific information about your consumer rights and
responsibilities.

What is “Home Improvement?”
“Home improvement” essentially is any change you make to the
interior or exterior of your residence or property. It includes:
“…the repairing, remodeling, altering, converting, or
modernizing of, or adding to, residential property and
…shall include, but not be limited to, the construction,
erection, installation, replacement, or improvement of
driveways, swimming pools, including spas and hot tubs,
terraces, patios, storm windows, solar energy systems,
landscaping, fences, porches, garages, fallout shelters, basements, and other improvements of the structures or land
which is adjacent to a dwelling house. Home improvement
shall also mean the installation of home improvement
goods or the furnishing of home improvement services.”
(Business and Professions Code section 7151)

What is a Home Improvement Contract
and When Do I Need One?
A home improvement contract is an agreement between a
contractor and a property owner or between a contractor and a
tenant, and includes in its description all labor, services, and
materials to be furnished and performed. A home improvement
contract also can mean an agreement between a salesperson (home
improvement salesperson) and property/home owner or tenant.
(Business and Professions Code section 7151.2)

1

T E R M S

O F

AG R E E M E NT

A thorough contract details who will do the work, what materials
will be used, where the work will be done, when it will be done,
and how much it will cost.
Your home improvement contract always should be in writing,
legible, easy to understand, and inform you of the right to cancel or
rescind the contract. If you are promised something verbally, make
sure that it also is included in writing. Any changes to the contract
need to be in writing, as well. These “change orders” should be kept
with your other project paperwork.
Anatomy of a Contract
A contract should contain all project details agreed upon by you
and your contractor. Among the details should be a description of
the work, price, payment schedule, who will pull necessary building
department permits, and when the job will begin and end. The
contractor’s license number, address, and phone number(s) also
should be listed.

Swimming pool contracts must include a plan and scale drawing
showing the shape, size/dimensions, and construction and
equipment specifications.
Make sure the contract includes everything that is agreed to, up
to and including complete cleanup and removal of debris and
materials, and special requests like saving lumber for firewood or
saving certain materials or appliances.

The Sign of a Well-Built Contract –
Describe Everything
The best way to avoid disputes over what is or isn’t expected from a
home improvement job is to include all of the details into a written,
signed contract.
The contract should be as specific as possible regarding all materials
to be used, such as the style, brand, model, quality, quantity,
weight, color, size, or any other description that may apply.
For example: “Install upper and lower maple kitchen cabinets,
manufactured by Company XYZ, model 01381A, style/color
2

A

C O N S U M E R

G U I D E TO

H O M E

I M P R OV E M E NT

C O NT R AC T S

0123, hinge and hardware selection, as per the plan dimensions
and diagram,” rather than “install kitchen cabinets.”

Don’t sign anything until you
understand the contract and
agree to the terms.

Complaints and Warranties
If the contractor offers a warranty for labor and/or materials, be
sure to get that in writing. The contract should specify which parts
of the work are covered and the duration of the warranty. You also
should request any written warranties offered by the manufacturers
of materials or appliances that are installed by the contractor.
Consumers have four (4) years to file a complaint with the Contractors
State License Board (CSLB) about a faulty project. That deadline
can be extended if additional warranties are written into the contract.

WILL YOUR PROJECT DESCRIPTION
GIVE YOU THE RIGHT RESULTS?
GOOD EXPECTATIONS

TROUBLE
AHEAD

GOOD LUCK

Install xx (quantity) Company XYZ upper/
lower maple kitchen cabinets, model
ABC, style/color 0123, European hinges,
hardware model 1000, per plan dimensions and diagram.

Install maple
kitchen
cabinets.

Install some
cabinets.

Paint indoor entry (per plan) using
Brand X paint, color 567, two coats, with
preparation and taping described in
next paragraph.

Prep and paint
entryway with
blue paint.

Paint the entry.

Install Brand X kitchen faucet in style
ABC and color BCS.

Replace kitchen
Replace kitchen
faucet, if
fixtures.
necessary.
3

T E R M S

O F

AG R E E M E NT

Money – The Bottom Line
Price – All contracts must include the agreed-upon price. By law,
the job must be completed for the agreed-upon contract price.
If the contract price needs to be changed, it MUST be done with
a written change order that becomes a part of the contract.
Down Payment – If the contract calls for a down payment
before work starts, the down payment cannot be more than
$1,000 or 10 percent of the contract price, whichever is less, for
a home improvement job or swimming pool, excluding finance
charges. There are no exceptions for special order materials.
There is a down payment exception for a handful of licensees to
protect consumers, known as blanket performance and payment
bonds. These exceptions are noted on CSLB’s website.
Schedule of Payments – A home improvement contract must
include a payment schedule. It should show the amount of each
payment and explain what work, materials or services are to be
performed for that particular payment. Payments to the contractor
cannot exceed the value of the performed work.
Swimming Pools – A final swimming pool contract
payment may be made at the completion of the final
plastering phase of construction (provided that any
installation of equipment, decking, or fencing required
by the contract also is completed).
Finance Charges – If applicable, finance charges must be calculated
and laid out in detail, separate from the contract amount.
Sales Commission – If the contract provides for payment of
a salesperson’s commission as part of the contract price, that
payment must be made on a pro rata basis in proportion to the
schedule of payments made to the contractor.
Salespersons – A salesperson cannot legally sign a home
improvement contract for the contractor unless they are a
valid, CSLB-registered home improvement salesperson (HIS).

4

A

C O N S U M E R

G U I D E TO

H O M E

I M P R OV E M E NT

C O NT R AC T S

Mechanics Liens
Contractors are required to give consumers a “Mechanics Lien
Warning” (see BPC 7159(e)(4)) about property liens). Anyone who
helps improve property, but is not paid, may place what is called
a mechanics lien on the property. A mechanics lien is a claim
made against the property by the person who was not paid, and is
recorded with the county.
Even if the contractor is paid in full, unpaid subcontractors, suppliers,
and laborers involved in the project may record a mechanics lien
and sue the property owner in court to foreclose the lien. A property
owner could be forced to pay twice or have the court sell the home
to pay the lien. Liens also can affect a consumer’s personal credit
rating, and affect their ability to borrow and refinance.
Consumers can protect themselves from liens by getting a list from
the contractor of all subcontractors and material suppliers who will
work on the project, along with the dates they will start and finish
the work. Material suppliers and subcontractors are required to give
the property owner a “Preliminary Notice” of their right to file a
lien within 20 days of delivering products/materials or 20 days of
beginning the work. Have subcontractors sign lien releases when
their portion of the work is completed.
Another option for consumers is to pay with a joint check that is
payable to both the contractor and the subcontractor or material
supplier.

For more information on this
subject, go to www.cslb.ca.gov
and search for “mechanics liens.”

5

T E R M S

O F

AG R E E M E NT

Canceling the Contract
Right to Cancel
The Contractors State License Law requires a seller of home goods
or services to give the buyer three (3) business days (or five
business days if the buyer is 65 or older) to think about whether to
buy the offered goods or services.

To cancel, the buyer need only give the contractor written notice of
their intent not to be bound by the contract—there is no penalty
or obligation on the part of the buyer. Under state law, when the
contract is canceled, the “contractor/seller” (see BPC 7159 (e)(6)(b)
for reference) is required to return any money that was paid within
10 days of receiving the cancellation request. The consumer/buyer
must return any materials to the contractor that were applied to
the contract.
The purpose of the right to cancel is to protect consumers from the
pressure they often feel from in-home solicitors.
If the contract is negotiated at the contractor’s place of business,
the three- or five-day right to cancel does not apply.

The Right to Cancel Exception
Service and Repair Contracts
One major exception to the three- or five-day right to cancel is
a “service and repair” contract that covers emergency repairs or
services that are requested by the consumer on short notice. The
right to a cancelation notice is automatically voided the moment
the contract is signed and the contractor begins working on a
service and repair contract.

6

A

C O N S U M E R

G U I D E TO

H O M E

I M P R OV E M E NT

C O NT R AC T S

Building Permits
A construction or building permit is a required document in
most jurisdictions for a large range of project types, including
new construction or adding to pre-existing structures, major
renovations, heating and air-conditioning repairs, and installation
of water heaters and swimming pools. Permits are issued by the
local building department. Generally, the new construction must
be inspected during construction and after completion to ensure
compliance with national, regional, and local building codes.
Failure to obtain a permit can result in significant fines and
penalties, and even demolition of unauthorized construction if it
does not meet code requirements.

A Word About Insurance
Does your contractor have employees? Workers’ compensation
insurance is required by law if the contractor has employees
or workers. Check the CSLB website at www.cslb.ca.gov to make
sure the workers’ compensation policy is current.
Although not required, it’s also a good idea to ask whether the
contractor carries general liability insurance in case your property
accidentally is damaged during the project. You might consider
contacting your homeowner insurance carrier to find out if it would
be advisable to take out a temporary “rider” to your insurance
policy, which is extended coverage for a determined period of
time or for a particular use.

7

HOMEOWNER CHECKLIST
CHECK OUT YOUR CONTRACTOR
Did you contact the Contractors State License Board (CSLB) to check the
status of the contractor’s license? Connect with CSLB at (800) 321-CSLB (2752)
or www.cslb.ca.gov.
Did you get at least three local references from the contractors you
are considering?
Did you call the references and personally view the contractor’s
completed work?
Does the contractor carry general liability insurance?
BUILDING PERMITS
Does your contract state whether you or your contractor will pull necessary
building permits before the work starts?
Are the permit fees included in the contract price?
DOUBLE-CHECK THE CONTRACT
Did you read and understand your contract?
Does the three- or five-day right to cancel a contract apply to you?
Does the contract identify when work will begin and end?
Does the contract include a detailed description of the work to be done,
the materials to be used, and/or equipment to be installed?
Are you required to make a down payment?
(The down payment should never be more than 10 percent of the
contract price or $1,000, whichever is less, unless there is a valid blanket
performance and payment bond on file with CSLB.)
Is there a schedule of payments?
(Only pay as work is completed, not before).
Did your contractor give you a “Mechanics Lien Warning” notice that
describes mechanics liens and how to prevent them?
Do you have changes or additions to your contract?
(Remember that all changes must be in writing and signed by both parties
to avoid disagreements.)
8

w w w. c s l b . c a . g o v

NOTES

CONTRACTORS STATE LICENSE BOARD

P.O. Box 26000
Sacramento, CA 95826-0026
800-321-CSLB (2752)
www.cslb.ca.gov • SeniorScamStopper.com
13P-045/1024

10

