Unhappy With Your
Contractor on a Home
Improvement Project?
Read this!
The Contractors State License Board knows how challenging it can be when something
goes wrong with a contractor on your home improvement project. But before you dismiss
or replace your contractor, there are some things you should know.
GIV E T H E CONT R ACTOR A N
OP P ORT U N IT Y TO R ESP O N D

PU T IT IN WRIT ING !
Your contractor needs to be made aware of your
exact problems with the work. CSLB recommends
you express in writing what these are, along with your
requested resolution, with a reasonable deadline for
this to occur.

Attempt to reach a reasonable agreement for
your contractor to correct the problems identified in
your letter.
If problems remain after the contractor has returned
to correct or complete the work or if the contractor
does not respond to your letter or refuses to address

S OME SUG G EST ED

TIPS:
●

The problems should relate to the
completion or repair of work that is included
in the written contract and any written
change order agreed to by the parties.

●

●

The writing should be a letter sent by
first class and certified mail or attached to
an email as a portable document format
(PDF or something similar). Keep a copy
of the letter for yourself.
If you believe the matter may escalate
to the need to hire another contractor,
then you may wish to limit your informal
back-and-forth communications with your
contractor, such as texts and emails, that
may complicate any review and resolution
of problems with the work.

the problems, you may need to hire a new licensed
contractor to correct or complete the work. Before hiring
a new licensed contractor, take pictures of the defective
and incomplete work. Before any new contractor begins
work, you may wish to ask if they are willing to explain
to others any problems with the work they were hired
to repair or complete. Their explanation may be helpful
if there is a CSLB complaint or other action concerning
your project.

F IL E A CON SU M ER COM P LA I N T!
You should file a complaint with CSLB if you have
concerns about your contractor. Please visit CSLB’s
Filing a Complaint page at www.cslb.ca.gov/
Complaint for more information.
More information and a sample letter may be found
at www.cslb.ca.gov.
13P-040/0724

