 Visit www.ca.gov/lafires for information and resources for Californians impacted by the Los Angeles Fires.
 Renewal Fee Postponement for Los Angeles Wildfire Survivors.

×
×

 URGENT NOTICE! CSLB online services will be unavailable on Tuesday July 1, 2025 from 12:00am until 12:20am due to system

maintenance.
CSLB’s GET LICENSED TO BUILD WORKSHOP Friday, July 11th, 10 a.m.
Register on Webex
Workshop Presentation
 

×
✔ License Check  Subscribe About CSLB Public Meetings Contact Us

  

Translate this site:

Select Language ​▼


Home
Consumers
Legal Issues For Consumers
Mechanics Lien
If A Mechanics Lien Is Filed Against You

What if a Mechanics Lien is Filed on
Your Property?
Determine if it is a valid lien. It may not be valid if the work was not
completed or supplies were not included in the plans or contracts. An
attorney can help you find out if the lien is valid.
Often lien claims are invalid because the contractor, subcontractor, laborer,
or material supplier has failed to meet the required timelines for filing the
claim. Review the checklist below to determine if the claimant followed the
required timelines.

Lien Requirements Checklist
Check to see if a Preliminary Notice was given to you within the
specific time frames. (Remember: direct contractors and laborers do
not have to file preliminary notices.)
A subcontractor or material supplier has 20 days after beginning work
or delivering materials to serve you a Preliminary Notice. If the notice is
late, the claimant loses lien rights for work done or materials delivered
more than 20 days before the notice. The claim against your property is
only valid for work done or supplies delivered 20 days before notice
was given and anytime thereafter.
Be sure the Notice of Mechanics Lien accompanies the lien claim.
The claim should include the amount owed, the service or products
provided, the employer, the property owner, the address or description
of where work was done or products delivered, the claimant's address,
and a Proof of Service Affadivit completed and signed by the person
serving the Notice and the claim.
Check to see if the potential lien claimant filed the mechanics lien
within the legal time frame. If the potential lien claimant fails to
record the mechanics lien within the appropriate time frame, the lien
isn't valid.
The potential lien claimant must record the mechanics lien within 90
days of:
 Completion of work;
 When the property owner began using the improvement;* or
 When the property owner accepted the improvement.

Settings

*This is sometimes hard to verify because the homeowner often
occupies the residence during construction. Contact an attorney for
assistance on this point.
Check with your local superior court to see if the subcontractor or
material supplier filed a timely lien foreclosure action.
A lien foreclosure action is a lawsuit to foreclose the mechanics lien.
The lien claimant must file a lien foreclosure action within 90 days of
the date that he or she recorded the mechanics lien. Often a lien
claimant with a valid claim will fail to follow through, making the lien
invalid.

Invalid Liens
A lien stays in the county records and on your property title until you
take action to remove it. An invalid lien can make it difficult or
impossible to sell, refinance, or obtain a line of credit on your property.
If the contractor, subcontractor, laborer, or material supplier fails to
follow any of the specific time frames, you can petition the court to
remove the lien.
Although anyone can record a mechanics lien, unlicensed
contractors cannot foreclose on a mechanics lien if the work is
valued at more than $500.
Steps to removing an invalid lien:
Send the lien claimant a written request by certified, registered, or
express mail. Keep a copy of your letter and postage receipt as proof of
your request. Include:
 Deviations you've identified from the above checklist;
 A request for the claimant to remove the lien; and
 Remind the claimant that if the lien is not removed and you

have to get an attorney to remove it, the court can award you
the attorney fees deemed reasonable to release the lien. The
mechanics lien law changed July 1, 2012, removing the former
$2,000 cap.
Send the request to the claimant's last known, verified address.
Sometimes sending the letter is enough to persuade the lien claimant
to release the lien.
Keep all your documents and paperwork. You may need to
demonstrate to a court that the lien claimant is unable or unwilling to
execute a release of the lien or cannot, with reasonable diligence, be
found.

Court Petition to Release the Property Lien
If the lien claimant doesn't remove the invalid lien, and the time has
expired to record the mechanics lien and take action to foreclose, you
may petition the court for a decree to release the property from the
lien. This is a complicated process that may require the services of an
attorney.
For more information regarding mechanics liens, see: Civil Code
sections 8000—9566 .

Back to Top

Conditions of Use

Privacy Policy

Accessibility

Accessibility Certification
Copyright © 2025 State of California

